========================================
RFC 004: E2E Test Framework Enhancements
========================================

Changelog
---------

- 2021-09-14: started initial draft (@tychoish)

Abstract
--------

This document discusses a series of improvements to the e2e test framework
that we can consider during the next few releases to help boost confidence in
Tendermint releases, and improve developer efficiency.

Background
----------

During the 0.35 release cycle, the E2E tests were a source of great
value, helping to identify a number of bugs before release. At the same time,
the tests were not consistently passing during this time, thereby reducing
their value, and forcing the core development team to allocate time and energy
to maintaining and chasing down issues with the e2e tests and the test
harness. The experience of this release cycle calls to mind a series of
improvements to the test framework, and this document attempts to capture
these improvements, along with motivations, and potential for impact.

Projects
--------

Flexible Workload Generation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Presently the e2e suite contains a single workload generation pattern, which
exists simply to ensure that the test networks have some work during their
runs. However, the shape and volume of the work is very consistent and is very
gentle to help ensure test reliability.

We don't need a complex workload generation framework, but being able to have 
a few different workload shapes available for test networks, both generated and
hand-crafted, would be useful.

Workload patterns/configurations might include:

- transaction targeting patterns (include light nodes, round robin, target
  individual nodes)

- variable transaction size over time.

- transaction broadcast option (synchronously, checked, fire-and-forget,
  mixed).

- number of transactions to submit.

- non-transaction workloads: (evidence submission, query, event subscription.)

Configurable Generator
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The nightly e2e suite is defined by the `testnet generator
<https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/main/test/e2e/generator/generate.go#L13-L65>`_,
and it's difficult to add dimensions or change the focus of the test suite in
any way without modifying the implementation of the generator. If the
generator were more configurable, potentially via a file rather than in
the Go implementation, we could modify the focus of the test suite on the
fly.

Features that we might want to configure:

- number of test networks to generate of various topologies, to improve
  coverage of different configurations.

- test application configurations (to modify the latency of ABCI calls, etc.)

- size of test networks.

- workload shape and behavior.

- initial sync and catch-up configurations.

The workload generator currently provides runtime options for limiting the
generator to specific types of P2P stacks, and for generating multiple groups
of test cases to support parallelism. The goal is to extend this pattern and
avoid hardcoding the matrix of test cases in the generator code.  Once the
testnet configuration generation behavior is configurable at runtime,
developers may be able to use the e2e framework to validate changes before
landing changes that break e2e tests a day later.

In addition to the autogenerated suite, it might make sense to maintain a
small collection of hand-crafted cases that exercise configurations of
concern, to run as part of the nightly (or less frequent) loop.

Implementation Plan Structure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As a development team, we should determine the features should impact the e2e
testing early in the development cycle, and if we intend to modify the e2e
tests to exercise a feature, we should identify this early and begin the
integration process as early as possible.

To facilitate this, we should adopt a practice whereby we exercise specific
features that are currently under development more rigorously in the e2e
suite, and then as development stabilizes we can reduce the number or weight
of these features in the suite.

As of 0.35 there are essentially two end to end tests: the suite of 64
generated test networks, and the hand crafted `ci.toml` test case. The
generated test cases help provide systemtic coverage, while the `ci` run 
provides coverage for a large number of features. 

Reduce Cycle Time
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

One of the barriers to leveraging the e2e framework, and one of the challenges
in debugging failures, is the cycle time of running a single test iteration is
quite high: 5 minutes to build the docker image, plus the time to run the test
or tests.

There are a number of improvements and enhancements that can reduce the cycle
time in practice:

- reduce the amount of time required to build the docker image used in these
  tests. Without the dependency on CGo, the tendermint binaries could be
  (cross) compiled outside of the docker container and then injected into
  them, which would take better advantage of docker's native caching,
  although, without the dependency on CGo there would be no hard requirement
  for the e2e tests to use docker.

- support test parallelism. Because of the way the testnets are orchestrated
  a single system can really only run one network at a time. For executions
  (local or remote) with more resources, there's no reason to run a few
  networks in parallel to reduce the feedback time.

- prune testnet configurations that are unlikely to provide good signal, to
  shorten the time to feedback.

- apply some kind of tiered approach to test execution, to improve the
  legibility of the test result. For example order tests by the dependency of
  their features, or run test networks without perturbations before running
  that configuration with perturbations, to be able to isolate the impact of
  specific features.

- orchestrate the test harness directly from go test rather than via a special
  harness and shell scripts so e2e tests may more naively fit into developers
  existing workflows.

Many of these improvements, particularly, reducing the build time will also
reduce the time to get feedback during automated builds.

Deeper Insights
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When a test network fails, it's incredibly difficult to understand _why_ the
network failed, as the current system provides very little insight into the
system outside of the process logs. When a test network stalls or fails
developers should be able to quickly and easily get a sense of the state of
the network and all nodes.

Improvements in persuit of this goal, include functionality that would help
node operators in production environments by improving the quality and utility
of the logging messages and other reported metrics, but also provide some
tools to collect and aggregate this data for developers in the context of test
networks.

- Interleave messages from all nodes in the network to be able to correlate
  events during the test run.

- Collect structured metrics of the system operation (CPU/MEM/IO) during the
  test run, as well as from each tendermint/application process.

- Build (simple) tools to be able to render and summarize the data collected
  during the test run to answer basic questions about test outcome.

Flexible Assertions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Currently, all assertions run for every test network, which makes the
assertions pretty bland, and the framework primarily useful as a smoke-test
framework, but it might be useful to be able to write and run different
tests for different configurations. This could allow us to test outside of the
happy-path.

In general our existing assertions occupy a fraction of the total test time,
so the relative cost of adding a few extra test assertions would be of limited
cost, and could help build confidence.

Additional Kinds of Testing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The existing e2e suite, exercises networks of nodes that have homogeneous
tendermint version, stable configuration, that are expected to make
progress. There are many other possible test configurations that may be
interesting to engage with. These could include dimensions, such as:

- Multi-version testing to exercise our compatibility guarantees for networks
  that might have different tendermint versions.

- As a flavor or mult-version testing, include upgrade testing, to build
  confidence in migration code and procedures.

- Additional test applications, particularly practical-type applciations
  including some that use gaiad and/or the cosmos-sdk. Test-only applications
  that simulate other kinds of applications (e.g. variable application
  operation latency.)

- Tests of "non-viable" configurations that ensure that forbidden combinations
  lead to halts.

References
----------

- `ADR 66: End-to-End Testing <../architecture/adr-066-e2e-testing.md>`_
